Let's implement a health check,
that is two health checks actually,
a liveness and the readiness probe.
To start with, let's run the lab
tolerance-health start script,
which both populates our
example source code directories
and creates an OpenShift project
for us to use a little bit later on.
So the application is
the monolith calculator.
It's in DO378/labs/tolerance-health/quarkus-calculator-monolith.
If you have a look at this,
it's just a pom file and the source code.
So what we are going to add first is
the extension quarkus smallrye-health.
And then what we are going to do is create
a little cheat along with a way to
report the application's health status.
We're going to create a a LivenessResource.java file,
where we are going to define a
rest endpoint called /crash,
which in the case that
it is sent a GET request,
will flip the application's
liveness state from true,
which is a default to false.
This is actually what you would
normally have here, right?
So note this is an
ApplicationScoped bean,
which we will inject into
the liveness probe and we
will use it to report whether
the service is alive or not.
So this is where you would actually
implement your checks right?
Now let's implement the liveness
probe as well, LivenessHealthResource as
we are going to call it, simply
annotating it with @Liveness annotation.
And of course, some sort of a scope
allows us to inject that
LivenessResources we have
just implemented and implement
the health check requirement,
which is the call method that
returns a HealthCheckResponse.
What we do is just simply check if
the liveness returns isAlive,
then we return up status,
otherwise return down status.
This, the combination of these
two allows us to simply send
a GET request to /crash of
this application and start or have,
have it start reporting that
it's not a live anymore.
So we can conveniently trip, it's
liveness state for testing.
What we'll also do is create another file,
ReadinessHealthResource.java
and it's going to be a readiness probe
annotated with the @Readiness annotation.
It is an @ApplicationScoped bean,
and it implements a HealthCheck.
What it does is actually simple as well.
We are simulating slow start ups here,
so we are implementing a counter
that is initially set to 0.
And in every invocation of the
health check, it is increased
and once we have performed 11 health checks,
it starts reporting that it is ready.
So it starts reporting up.
Before that, it's reporting, that is down.
Right!
Let's start our quarkus instance
and test things locally first.
So once the application is up and running,
we can simply send an inquiry
to the health endpoint
and we see that initially
Readiness probe report is DOWN,
whereas Liveness report is UP.
So we have to perform at
least 10 invocations,
actually 11, before we see that the
Readiness probe is actually reporting UP.
Now, when we invoke the crash endpoint,
the Service responds,
I'm not alive anymore
and from that point onwards,
the health endpoint reports
Liveness of DOWN and an overall
status of DOWN. Do note
the overall status actually is
always an aggregation of both.
So as long as either of
the 2 report is down,
the status is DOWN.
That includes custom
health checks as well.
All right!
So let us stop the local
instance of Quarkus,
load the OpenShift configuration and login
as a developer user.
We already have a tolerance-health project
created with a username as the suffix.
So what we need to make
sure is that first of all,
our application.properties file has
a readiness-probe and  the liveness-probe
configured both with a
period of 2 seconds.
Then if you haven't yet,
make sure that you've added
the OpenShift extension.
So with quarkus:add-extension,
Dextension equals openshift,
we will add that one to pom.xml and
then package the
application with quarkus.
kubernetes.deploy set to true.
And because we want to be able
to test the application from
outside Dquarkus.openshift.expose
also set to true.
It's going to take a little while,
but then when it finishes,
we can see that there is a
quarkus-solver pod being created.
Now, we do have a route here,
I'm just going to copy the host
name to use a little bit later.
Now, we see on the second attempt
that the pod is reported as Running,
but it still says it's not ready.
All right!
So for the amount of time that
it reports that it is not ready,
we cannot access the application
at the host name that it's
been assigned because it's not
ready and OpenShift will
refuse to put it into
service before it reports that it's ready.
Now, I have to use a test from within.
So it's still not ready.
I have to use a test from
within using oc exec,
sending a curl command to
localhost port 8080/
q/health to be able
to get its current status,
which has just flipped the moment that
I executed that curl command.
So now the oc get pods command reports
this pod as ready, fully ready.
And the application will respond
that the host name as well,
because now it's UP and
it's been put into service.
Let's see what happens when we send
a request to the crash endpoint
flipping the liveness status, right?
So the service reports
it's not alive anymore.
The liveness probe does not fail
immediately because it's
scheduled on a period.
So only after 2 seconds do we
see that there was a restart
of this container in the pod and that
is now not ready at this moment.
If we have a look at the events
associated with this pod,
we can see that at some point in time,
the Liveness probe had failed with
a statuscode of 503.
And the Container quarkus-solver
failed liveness probe and
it will be restarted.
And that is a normal behavior for the
OpenShift liveness probe to perform.
Finally, the pod is up
and running again because
the readiness probe is now reporting
ready status all over again.
And that concludes this exercise,
which we can clean up with
lab tolerance-health
finish script and move on to
the last video in this chapter,
which is the end of Chapter
Challenge lab. See you there.